---
title: 68000 and the 6502 CPU
description: A guide to the basic differences between 6502 and 68000 CPUs
draft: false
tags:
  - amiga
  - assembly
  - asm6502
  - asm68000
  - guide
date: 2024-01-27
---
## Introduction

I've been reading up on the 680x0 CPU family.  One of the things I wanted to get my head around are the differences between this CPU and the 6502, the CPU I know. Data handling, address manipulation and basic arithmetic are drastically enhanced in the 680x0.

If you know your 6502 CPU architecture then this short list of differences might be interesting.

## Memory and Byte order

Do not think that because the CPU is 32 bits it also accesses and uses memory like this. The 680x0 still looks at its memory as BYTES. This is important to know, as some operations require to you align addresses or data to even bytes in memory. So this is not really a difference! :) What a way to start this list.

The 6502 stores numeric values as *little-endian*. This means that the low byte of a value is first in memory, and then the high byte. The 680x0 uses *big-endian*: values are stored with the high byte first.

Example 16 bit value `#$12a0`:

* 6502:  stored as `#$a0`, `#$12`
* 680x0: stored as `#$12`, `#$a0`

## Number size

Most commands in the 680x0 require an indication of how big the value we're working with is. This is done by using `.b`, `.w`, and `.l`, meaning byte (8 bits), word (16 bits) and longword (32 bits) respectively. Operations are performed only on those bits. So using `MOVE.B #$11, D0` will set the lowest 8 bits in `D0` only. The rest is unmodified.

## Data registers

The well known `.A`, `.X` and `.Y` registers are absent on the 680x0. Instead, there are 8 data registers: `D0` to `D7`. The load commands (`LDA, LDX, LDY`) for the old registers are gone, of course, and replaced by the, very important and multi-use, `MOVE` instruction.  

Example:  

* 6502: `LDA #$10`
* 680x0: `MOVE.B #$10, D0`

And as each data register is 32 bit, it's so much easier to work with larger numbers, like:  

* `MOVE.B #$12, D0`
* `MOVE.W #$1234, D0`
* `MOVE.L #$12345678, D0`

>[!Tip]
>Although a **data register** is 32 bits, the **data bus** itself is 16 bits. So 32 bits values will transfer slower than 16 or 8 bit values, because it will require two data transfers. Something to remember: if you can get away with using 16 bits or less, do it.

## Address registers

These were not present on the 6502, we needed to use memory locations to store pointers.  This meant that this data was **OUTSIDE** the CPU. On the 680x0, the address registers are **INSIDE** the CPU and therefore they are much more efficient.
  
You can use `A0` to `A6`. You should stay away from `A7` as it is used as the stack pointer by the CPU. But having 7 address registers and 8 data registers is incredibly useful to someone who previously had 3 data registers and a few zero page locations to work with. 

One of the ways to 'walk' through addresses on the 6502 was to use the zero page. You put pointers to the data into an address in the zero page (preferably, because zero page addressing was faster than higher page addressing), and then used _zero page indirect indexed addressing_:

>[!Example]
>Read bytes from address `$1000` onwards until read byte is a zero:
>```asm6502
>		LDA #$00
>		STA $FA
>		LDA #$10
>		STA $FB
>		LDY #$00
>loop:
>		LDA ($FA),Y
>		BEQ end
>		...
>		INY
>		JMP loop
>end:
>		RTS
>```
>
>This is done in 680x0 by setting the address registers, and using +:
>
>```asm6502
>		MOVE.W #$1000, A0
>loop:
>		MOVE.B (A0)+, D0
>		BEQ end
>		...
>		BRA loop
>end:
>		RTS
>```

The address in `A0` is incremented after reading it, because we use `(A0)+`. The fun thing is, you can use `+(AO)` and then the value in `A0` is increased before it is read. Really powerful.  This also eliminates the need for self modifying code, where we modified addresses that reference locations in the machine. The modifying is still done, of course (in `A0`), but it is CPU controlled and we cannot destroy the program this way because it is not happening in memory.

There are variants to using the address registers:

`MOVE.W 8(A1), D1` will first add 8 to the address pointer in `A1` and put the word from that location into `D1`. The big difference between this and the first example is that it does not modify the address pointer in `A0`, and it is more like the 6502 example seen above. Another example:
 
`MOVE.W 8(A1,D1.L), D2` will add 8 to the address pointer in `A1`, and then the 32 bit number in `D1` to that pointer as well, and it will then put the word from that location into `D2`. 
This adds so much choice to the way we can construct loops, its almost overwhelming. I will probably stick to the more simple versions when I begin creating some programs. :)

## Branching

We need branching so we can create logic and loops. As expected, the branching possibilities of the 680x0 are numerous. The same instructions as on the 6502 are available (`BEQ, BNE, BPL, BMI, BCC, BCS` etc) but there are more added.  
  
The *Test, Decrement And Branch* variety, or `DBcc` is one I really like because it is two commands in one. First, the test is performed and if this test fails a branch is performed to the label specified. If the test passes, program flow continues. Also, a data register (acting as a counter) is decremented and while this value is not -1, the program is branching back to the label as specified.  
  
Here is an example of a `WHILE count =>0` loop, which exits if the read value is 0:

>[!Example]
>```asm6502
>		MOVE.W #10, D0   ; we do this ten times
>loop:
>		...
>		TST.W (A1)+     ; test value of address in A1
>		DBNE D0, loop   ; branch if not zero, or counter is positive
>```

This is the same as:

>[!Example]
>```asm6502
>		MOVE.W #9, D0   ; we do this ten times
>loop:
>		TST.W (A1)+     ; test value of address in A1  
>		BEQ end         ; if address value is 0, go to end
>		SUB.W  #1, D0   ; subtract 1 from counter
>		BPL loop        ; If >= 0, branch to loop  
>end:
>		...
>```

I know which one I like more!  

## Conclusion
 
The 680x0 sure is a fun CPU family. It fixes so many things that were cumbersome in the 6502 and the other 8 bit chips. There is more of a choice on how to tackle programming challenges.  
